---
layout: post
title: 2018 - A Year in Review
description: "My first year in review"
tags: [Journal]
comments: true
---

2018 is coming to an end and I have this sudden inner urge to write a year-in-review post. All businesses make an annual practice of evaluating their performance throughout the year and what they need to do to get better.

Well, I can do that too! and if you think about it, year-roundups are good for reflection, learning, and gratitude. It's a great exercise to appreciate all the little and big things in life. I really needed that. This time of year, the weather makes me moody. Sometimes it's raining heavily outside. I find myself slipping into a seasonal depression of sorts. I suppose I am affected by rain. Magnified by losing streaks in several areas in my life, it's crippling. I feel demotivated, I often find myself easily overwhelmed. I can't seem to finish anything and can't seem to win anything, especially in the last couple of months. 

I started to think this has been a bad year for me to say the least. I think I've spent all my luck this year and just want to wrap the year really soon. 

I want 2019. Right now.

However, I stumbled across this thoughts this morning, "Hey, 2018 isn't really that bad, isn't it?"

So, this post is some kind of an effort to find the answer, to see what’s happened a bit more clearly.

Before we begin, I want to say thanks to everyone for everything.

[Life is a single player game](http://thehappyphilosopher.com/single-player-game/).

"...All of your interpretations are alone. All your memories are alone. You’re gone in three generations and no one cares. Before you showed up nobody cared. It’s all single player." - Naval Ravikant

Despite all that, I know that I am standing on the shoulders of giants. I am immensely indebted to lots of people for the continuous support, it means the world to me. As I am nothing, who depends on others and largely on luck to get through life. Thanks for those who have helped me make it this far.

Anyway, this post is probably relevant to no one but myself, so I can't promise you'll get anything from it. Thank you so much for taking the time to review my year with me regardless. 

Disclaimer: this post is by no means a brag towards my "accomplishments".

## SUMMARY

2017 was bad for me overall. I got rejected from every internship and program I applied to. More than 30 rejections, if I am not mistaken. Although, I finally got accepted at [Kata.ai](https://kata.ai/) on the last day of the internship period deadline and ended the year on a high note (I guess). Still, the highlights were the rejections and failures. Because.. they suck. I am not trying to convince you otherwise. But I am so grateful nonetheless. I learned to deal with rejection and failure, big time. At one point, I got rejected on a program during an interview because I wanted to graduate next year, so I need to give up my chance to go to [Silicon Valley](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silicon_Valley). Oh, but I got a direct offer from one of Indonesia's [unicorns](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/u/unicorn.asp), passed the interview, only to throw it away because I finally had a chance to build my own company. So, 2017 was OK-ish then.

However, 2018 was a whirlwind year. It was a great year, an exciting one – but also a stressful and life-changing year. It was a year of big decisions and major changes for me. In many respects, this year was ridiculous. I had so many humbling, breathtaking, and incredible experiences. It's crazy. Here's the list:

- Finished college. This is probably the result I am most proud of this year. Such an exciting milestone. Personally, I was in no rush to graduate and even if I had to spend the year without graduating, I would not be ashamed at all. I really enjoyed the process. The only obstacle was the college tuition. I was a BIDIKMISI scholarship recipient and depended on this scholarship to cover my tuition and living expense. If I didn't finish my study this year, I would have had to pay the next semester myself. So I decided to catch up on October Graduation. Bittersweet. Sometimes there is this mixed up feeling, I am happy and sad at the same time, mostly because I am no longer be able to pursue some opportunities which were opened only for 'student'. Looking back, there is a lot of regrets too. I am a first-generation college student and I don't know how college would be. I wish I could have done more. Need to move on and get on with life.
- Finally launched [Neurafarm](http://neurafarm.io/)'s product: Dr Tania. We're growing fast; established partnership with NVIDIA and many other great institutions. No big win yet. To be honest, the journey of building Neurafarm is one of the most humbling experiences in my life. I also messed up a lot and wish could have done everything better. Sometimes I am doubting myself. I definitely need to learn more.
- Got an offer from [the big four](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Four_tech_companies). Currently not available though. I wish the opportunity still open in the future. In addition, I got offers from several companies as well. Probably the same amount as my rejections last year. What a coincidence.  Need to maintain an online presence and keep learning.
- Worked part-time at [Prosa.ai](https://prosa.ai/) for six good months. Amazing experience and extreme learning; done several projects. The next day after my contract was over I had to move to Jakarta to do an internship at Microsoft Indonesia. Funnily enough, I then withdrew my internship because I want to focus on my startup and my thesis. This was one of the hardest decisions I needed to take.
- I travelled a lot this year; Saw the world by visiting 3 countries across Europe and Asia: Malaysia, Taiwan, Switzerland. Not that impressive. But I haven't even gone abroad before so it's all very special to me. Switzerland was the best destination, easily so. Got to visit a lot of beautiful spots there. I made my passport in 2017 'just in case' and never thought about visiting any countries within a couple of months. I didn't spend a dime on flights nor accommodations as well. Lucky me. Hope I get to visit more countries in the next year. 
- Got selected as a finalist of Microsoft Imagine Cup National Finals and [Regional Finals)](https://news.microsoft.com/apac/2018/04/02/meet-the-imagine-cup-2018-asia-pacific-regional-finalists/). I've always dreamt of winning Imagine Cup. I tried my best in 2017 but didn't even get selected for the National round. This year, we only end up as a finalist of regional finals. But that's okay. Other than that, I (and team) won several competitions as well this year. People around me are really great. I am so blessed. Oh, I received Ganesha Award too. What a pleasant surprise. However, I also failed miserably in lots of competitions. Didn't even managed to get to the final round of Data Mining competition of GEMASTIK. It sucked. I felt demotivated by these results. Need to be more persevere and resilient. 
- Continued my technology blog. Published 9 articles this year, not bad. But I got caught up by a lot of things and haven't even produced a single technology blog in the last 3 months of the year. So that's a blog each month until September. In reality, it's not that regular. Sometimes, I even skipped several weeks then write two articles in a row within a week.  I really need to discipline myself. At the end of the year, I decided to write non-fiction titled 'Moments'.  Probably going to continue the story next year. 
- Read a lot of book this year. Started reading Plato's which is quite hard to digest. Planning on reading more philoshopy books next year. 
- I tried to start running again. Lose some weight even just a little. But then... couldn't maintain it. I need to build habits because willpower just doesn't work.
- Tried rafting for the first time with Fadel, Pebi, Lintang, Berril, and Dewi. It was a good experience. I think I need to do more activities like this.
- Met with a lot of people from various backgrounds, attended many events e.g exhibition, networking. I think I need to get more involved in communities. 
- Became more aware of personal finance. Started investing. I began to invest in [cryptocurrency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptocurrency) which was a big mistake. Learned it the hard way. At least I have something to chuckle about. I tried to develop my investment portfolio this year. Ought to be more careful. Speaking of blockchain, I developed my first smart contract application this year. It's for automated underwriting.
- Developed new tastes in music. I also listen to more Jazz, Country, Rap, K-POP and EDM songs now. My most listened artists of the year were Eminem and Joey Alexander. Growing up, my parents always made me listen to classic rock;  White Lion, Aerosmith, Firehouse, Europe, Eagles.. such a good time. Music was a pretty big part of my life until I lost interest in guitar and piano lessons, but music was still something I always loved even if I was just listening to it. So I'm happy now to discover more songs that I love to listen to.
- Started watching anime again. After two years of 'hiatus', I finally watched some anime. I don't know if it's a good thing or not. It kept me entertained tho. Some kinds of a coping mechanism. I also watched lots of movies this year. Spiderman: Into the Spider-Verse is easily the best.

All in all, it's been a great year.

## PLANNING FOR NEXT YEAR

If I had to choose themes for the last five years of my life, they would be:
- 2014 & 2015: Year of Transition
- 2016 & 2017: Year of Learning and Preparation
- 2018: Year of Revolution

Looking by the pattern, 2019 should be a 'Year of Revolution' too. I think I’ve got my 2019 theme and statement ready to go now, but I’m going to spend a few more days considering it to make sure. 

However, I want to try something different for the next year. So I am going to write some of my plans down here to keep them in check:

0. Reconnect with God.
1. Run my first marathon.
2. Maintain an ongoing schedule of running at least 10 km a week.
3. Visit 5 different countries.
4. Read (at least) 24 books; Finish ESL, USLR, PRML, DL, and CV.
5. Make writing one the most important things I do all year: 2 posts a month.
6. Something with my financial (income, giving, savings, etc).
7. Help Neurafarm get Series A funding or become ************** resident.
8. Improve my English & Mathematics skill.
9. Publish a paper; Attend 1 conference.
10. Learn new tech stack.
11. Take IELTS or TOEFL test.
12. Start a book.
13. Learn to drive a car (get licensed).
14. Climb a mountain.
15. Go fishing.
16. Walk 10000 steps a day.
17. Re-learn piano.
18. Re-learn Deutsch and Japanese.
19. Prepare for Graduate school.
20. Meet with (at least) 50 new people.

2019 is going to be exciting, I have a lot to work on.

Thanks for reviewing my year with me. I hope that you have a fulfilling year! Let us be thankful for the year that has passed and even more thankful for another year to come. I wish you the best in 2019.